README.md, before:

[![HARP Repo](https://github-readme-stats.vercel.app/api/pin/?username=TEAMuP-dev&repo=HARP)](https://github.com/TEAMuP-dev/HARP)

PyHARP is a **companion package** for [HARP](https://github.com/TEAMuP-dev/HARP), an application which enables the seamless integration of machine learning models for audio into Digital Audio Workstations (DAWs). This repository provides a lightweight wrapper to embed **arbitrary Python code** for audio processing into [Gradio](https://www.gradio.app) endpoints which are accessible through HARP. In this way, HARP supports offline remote processing with algorithms or models that may be too resource-hungry to run on common hardware. HARP can be run as a standalone or from within DAWs that support external sample editing, such as [REAPER](https://www.reaper.fm), [Logic Pro X](https://www.apple.com/logic-pro/), or [Ableton Live](https://www.ableton.com/en/live/). Please see our [main repository](https://github.com/TEAMuP-dev/HARP) for more information and instructions on how to install and run HARP.

## Table of Contents
* **[Usage](#usage)**
    * **[Installing](#installing)**
    * **[Examples](#examples)**
    * **[Hosting Endpoints](#hosting-endpoints)**
    * **[Deploying to HARP](#deploying-to-HARP)**
* **[PyHARP Apps](#pyharp-apps)**
    * **[Model Card](#model-card)**
    * **[Processing Code](#processing-code)**
    * **[Gradio Endpoint](#gradio-endpoint)**
    * **[Pre-Trained Models](#pre-trained-models)**



# Usage
## Installing
If you plan on running or debugging a PyHARP app locally, you will need to install `pyharp`:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/TEAMuP-dev/pyharp
pip install -e pyharp
cd pyharp
```

## Examples
We provide several examples of how to create a PyHARP app under the `examples/` directory, along with a [template](examples/template/) for new apps. You can also find a list of models already deployed as PyHARP apps [here](https://github.com/TEAMuP-dev/HARP#models).

In order to run an app, you will need to install its corresponding dependencies. For example, to install the dependences for our [pitch shifter](examples/pitch_shifter/) example:

```bash
pip install -r examples/pitch_shifter/requirements.txt
```

The app can then be run with `app.py`:

```bash
python examples/pitch_shifter/app.py
```

This will create a local Gradio endpoint at the URL `http://localhost:<PORT>`, as well as a forwarded public Gradio endpoint at the URL `https://<RANDOM_ID>.gradio.live/`.

Below, you can see an example command line output after running `app.py`. It shows both the local endpoint (local URL) and the forwarded enpoint (public URL)

![example commandline output for deplying a gradio app.py](images/example_gradio.png)

You can see your Gradio app in HARP by loading either the local URL or public URL as a custom path in HARP, as is shown below.

![example commandline output for deplying a gradio app.py](images/custom_gradio_endpoint_in_harp.png)


## Hosting Endpoints
Automatically generated Gradio endpoints are only available for 72 hours. If you'd like to keep the endpoint active and share it with other users, you can leverage [HuggingFace Spaces](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/spaces-overview) (similar hosting services are also available) to host your PyHARP app indefinitely:

1. Create a new [HuggingFace Space](https://huggingface.co/new-space)
2. Initialize a Git repository locally and push commits to the `main` branch:
```bash
git init
git checkout -b main
git add .
git commit -m "Initial commit"
```
3. Link to the remote HuggingFace space and push to the `main` branch:
```bash
git remote add hf "https://huggingface.co/spaces/<USERNAME>/<SPACE_NAME>"
git pull hf main -X ours --allow-unrelated-histories
git push hf main
```

Your PyHARP app will then begin running at `https://huggingface.co/spaces/<USERNAME>/<SPACE_NAME>`. The shorthand `<USERNAME>/<SPACE_NAME>` can also be used within HARP to reference the endpoint.

---

Here are a few tips and best-practices when dealing with HuggingFace Spaces:
- Spaces operate based off of the files in the `main` branch
- An [access token](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/security-tokens) with "write" permissions may be required to push commits to HuggingFace Spaces
- A `README.md` file with metadata will be created automatically when a Space is initialized
  - This file also controls the Gradio version used for the Space
  - HARP does not currently support the latest version of Gradio
    - We recommend using __version 4.7.1__ at this time
- A `requirements.txt` file specifying all dependencies must be included for a Space to work properly
- A `.gitignore` file should be added to maintain repository orderliness (_e.g._ to ignore `src/_outputs`)

## Deploying to HARP
PyHARP apps can be accessed from [within HARP](https://github.com/TEAMuP-dev/HARP#available-models) through the local or forwarded URL corresponding to their active Gradio endpoints ([see above](#examples)), or the URL corresponding to their dedicated hosting service ([see above](#hosting-endpoints)), if applicable.



# PyHARP Apps
## Model Card
A model card defines various attributes of a PyHARP app and helps users understand its intended use. This information is also parsed within HARP and displayed when the model is selected.

The following processing code corresponds to our [pitch shifter](examples/pitch_shifter/app.py) example:
```python
from pyharp import ModelCard


card = ModelCard(
    name="Pitch Shifter",
    description="A pitch shifting example for HARP.",
    author="Hugo Flores Garcia",
    tags=["example", "pitch shift"]
)
```

## Processing Code
In PyHARP, arbitrary audio processing code is wrapped within a single function `process_fn`, for use with Gradio. The function should accept as an argument a path for input audio and should return a single path for output audio. Additional input arguments associated with the values of any [Gradio Components](https://www.gradio.app/docs/gradio/introduction) used as GUI controls can also be given.

<!--
This could be a source separation model, a text-to-music generation model, a music inpainting system, a librosa processing routine, etc.
-->

The following processing code corresponds to our [pitch shifter](examples/pitch_shifter/app.py) example:
```python
from pyharp import save_and_return_filepath

import torchaudio
import torch


@torch.inference_mode()
def process_fn(input_audio_path, pitch_shift_amount):
    from audiotools import AudioSignal
    
    sig = AudioSignal(input_audio_path)

    ps = torchaudio.transforms.PitchShift(
        sig.sample_rate, 
        n_steps=pitch_shift_amount, 
        bins_per_octave=12, 
        n_fft=512
    ) 
    sig.audio_data = ps(sig.audio_data)

    output_audio_path = save_and_return_filepath(sig)

    return output_audio_path
```

The function takes two arguments:
- `input_audio_path`: the filepath of the audio to process
- `pitch_shift`: the amount to pitch shift by (in semitones)

and returns:
- `output_audio_path`: the filepath of the processed audio

Note that this code uses the [audiotools](https://github.com/descriptinc/audiotools) library from Descript (installation instructions can be found [here](https://github.com/descriptinc/audiotools#installation) and documentation [here](https://descriptinc.github.io/audiotools/)).

## Gradio Endpoint
The main Gradio code block for a PyHARP app consists of defining the input and output [Gradio Components](https://www.gradio.app/docs/gradio/introduction), which should include an [Audio](https://www.gradio.app/docs/gradio/audio) component for both the input and output, and launching the endpoint. The `build_endpoint` function connects the components to the I/O of `process_fn` and extracts HARP-readable metadata from the model card and components to include in the endpoint. Currently, HARP supports the [Slider](https://www.gradio.app/docs/gradio/slider) and [Textbox](https://www.gradio.app/docs/gradio/textbox) components as GUI controls.

The following endpoint code corresponds to our [pitch shifter](examples/pitch_shifter/app.py) example:
```python
from pyharp import build_endpoint

import gradio as gr


with gr.Blocks() as demo:
    # Define the Gradio interface
    inputs = [
        gr.Audio(
            label="Audio Input", 
            type="filepath" # make sure type="filepath"!
        ),
        gr.Slider(
            minimum=-24, 
            maximum=24, 
            step=1, 
            value=7, 
            label="Pitch Shift (semitones)"
        ),
    ]
    
    # Initialize an audio component for the output
    output = gr.Audio(label="Audio Output", type="filepath")

    # Build a HARP-compatible endpoint
    widgets = build_endpoint(inputs, output, process_fn, card)

demo.queue()  # see the NOTE below
demo.launch(share=True)
```
**NOTE**: Make sure the order of the inputs matches the order of the arguments in `process_fn`. 

**NOTE**: All of the `gr.Audio` components MUST have `type="filepath"` in order to work with HARP.

**NOTE**: In order to be able to cancel an ongoing processing job within HARP, queueing in Gradio needs to be enabled by calling `demo.queue()`.

## Pre-Trained Models
If you want to build an endpoint that utilizes a pre-trained model, we recommend the following:
- Load the model outside of `process_fn`, so that it is only initialized once
- Store model weights within your app repository using [Git Large File Storage](https://git-lfs.com/)

Commit message:

Add explanation of copying template and clarify Git repository location for HuggingFace

README.md, after:

[![HARP Repo](https://github-readme-stats.vercel.app/api/pin/?username=TEAMuP-dev&repo=HARP)](https://github.com/TEAMuP-dev/HARP)

PyHARP is a **companion package** for [HARP](https://github.com/TEAMuP-dev/HARP), an application which enables the seamless integration of machine learning models for audio into Digital Audio Workstations (DAWs). This repository provides a lightweight wrapper to embed **arbitrary Python code** for audio processing into [Gradio](https://www.gradio.app) endpoints which are accessible through HARP. In this way, HARP supports offline remote processing with algorithms or models that may be too resource-hungry to run on common hardware. HARP can be run as a standalone or from within DAWs that support external sample editing, such as [REAPER](https://www.reaper.fm), [Logic Pro X](https://www.apple.com/logic-pro/), or [Ableton Live](https://www.ableton.com/en/live/). Please see our [main repository](https://github.com/TEAMuP-dev/HARP) for more information and instructions on how to install and run HARP.

## Table of Contents
* **[Usage](#usage)**
    * **[Installing](#installing)**
    * **[Examples](#examples)**
    * **[Hosting Endpoints](#hosting-endpoints)**
    * **[Deploying to HARP](#deploying-to-HARP)**
* **[PyHARP Apps](#pyharp-apps)**
    * **[Model Card](#model-card)**
    * **[Processing Code](#processing-code)**
    * **[Gradio Endpoint](#gradio-endpoint)**
    * **[Pre-Trained Models](#pre-trained-models)**



# Usage
## Installing
If you plan on running or debugging a PyHARP app locally, you will need to install `pyharp`:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/TEAMuP-dev/pyharp
pip install -e pyharp
cd pyharp
```

## Examples
We provide several examples of how to create a PyHARP app under the `examples/` directory, along with a [template](examples/template/) for new apps. You can also find a list of models already deployed as PyHARP apps [here](https://github.com/TEAMuP-dev/HARP#models).

In order to run an app, you will need to install its corresponding dependencies. For example, to install the dependences for our [pitch shifter](examples/pitch_shifter/) example:

```bash
pip install -r examples/pitch_shifter/requirements.txt
```

The app can then be run with `app.py`:

```bash
python examples/pitch_shifter/app.py
```

This will create a local Gradio endpoint at the URL `http://localhost:<PORT>`, as well as a forwarded public Gradio endpoint at the URL `https://<RANDOM_ID>.gradio.live/`.

Below, you can see an example command line output after running `app.py`. It shows both the local endpoint (local URL) and the forwarded enpoint (public URL)

![example commandline output for deplying a gradio app.py](images/example_gradio.png)

You can see your Gradio app in HARP by loading either the local URL or public URL as a custom path in HARP, as is shown below.

![example commandline output for deplying a gradio app.py](images/custom_gradio_endpoint_in_harp.png)

To create your own models, copy the template directory and then modify the new `app.py` file, filling in any model initialization, audio loading, processing, and saving code, and UI elements where shown:

```bash
cp -r examples/template my_model
cd my_model
# Open app.py in your preferred editor
```

## Hosting Endpoints
Automatically generated Gradio endpoints are only available for 72 hours. If you'd like to keep the endpoint active and share it with other users, you can leverage [HuggingFace Spaces](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/spaces-overview) (similar hosting services are also available) to host your PyHARP app indefinitely:

1. Create a new [HuggingFace Space](https://huggingface.co/new-space)
2. Initialize a Git repository in the directory containing your model and push commits to the `main` branch:
```bash
git init
git checkout -b main
git add .
git commit -m "Initial commit"
```
3. Link to the remote HuggingFace space and push to the `main` branch:
```bash
git remote add hf "https://huggingface.co/spaces/<USERNAME>/<SPACE_NAME>"
git pull hf main -X ours --allow-unrelated-histories
git push hf main
```

Your PyHARP app will then begin running at `https://huggingface.co/spaces/<USERNAME>/<SPACE_NAME>`. The shorthand `<USERNAME>/<SPACE_NAME>` can also be used within HARP to reference the endpoint.

---

Here are a few tips and best-practices when dealing with HuggingFace Spaces:
- Spaces operate based off of the files in the `main` branch
- An [access token](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/security-tokens) with "write" permissions may be required to push commits to HuggingFace Spaces
- A `README.md` file with metadata will be created automatically when a Space is initialized
  - This file also controls the Gradio version used for the Space
  - HARP does not currently support the latest version of Gradio
    - We recommend using __version 4.7.1__ at this time
- A `requirements.txt` file specifying all dependencies must be included for a Space to work properly
- A `.gitignore` file should be added to maintain repository orderliness (_e.g._ to ignore `src/_outputs`)

## Deploying to HARP
PyHARP apps can be accessed from [within HARP](https://github.com/TEAMuP-dev/HARP#available-models) through the local or forwarded URL corresponding to their active Gradio endpoints ([see above](#examples)), or the URL corresponding to their dedicated hosting service ([see above](#hosting-endpoints)), if applicable.



# PyHARP Apps
## Model Card
A model card defines various attributes of a PyHARP app and helps users understand its intended use. This information is also parsed within HARP and displayed when the model is selected.

The following processing code corresponds to our [pitch shifter](examples/pitch_shifter/app.py) example:
```python
from pyharp import ModelCard


card = ModelCard(
    name="Pitch Shifter",
    description="A pitch shifting example for HARP.",
    author="Hugo Flores Garcia",
    tags=["example", "pitch shift"]
)
```

## Processing Code
In PyHARP, arbitrary audio processing code is wrapped within a single function `process_fn`, for use with Gradio. The function should accept as an argument a path for input audio and should return a single path for output audio. Additional input arguments associated with the values of any [Gradio Components](https://www.gradio.app/docs/gradio/introduction) used as GUI controls can also be given.

<!--
This could be a source separation model, a text-to-music generation model, a music inpainting system, a librosa processing routine, etc.
-->

The following processing code corresponds to our [pitch shifter](examples/pitch_shifter/app.py) example:
```python
from pyharp import save_and_return_filepath

import torchaudio
import torch


@torch.inference_mode()
def process_fn(input_audio_path, pitch_shift_amount):
    from audiotools import AudioSignal
    
    sig = AudioSignal(input_audio_path)

    ps = torchaudio.transforms.PitchShift(
        sig.sample_rate, 
        n_steps=pitch_shift_amount, 
        bins_per_octave=12, 
        n_fft=512
    ) 
    sig.audio_data = ps(sig.audio_data)

    output_audio_path = save_and_return_filepath(sig)

    return output_audio_path
```

The function takes two arguments:
- `input_audio_path`: the filepath of the audio to process
- `pitch_shift`: the amount to pitch shift by (in semitones)

and returns:
- `output_audio_path`: the filepath of the processed audio

Note that this code uses the [audiotools](https://github.com/descriptinc/audiotools) library from Descript (installation instructions can be found [here](https://github.com/descriptinc/audiotools#installation) and documentation [here](https://descriptinc.github.io/audiotools/)).

## Gradio Endpoint
The main Gradio code block for a PyHARP app consists of defining the input and output [Gradio Components](https://www.gradio.app/docs/gradio/introduction), which should include an [Audio](https://www.gradio.app/docs/gradio/audio) component for both the input and output, and launching the endpoint. The `build_endpoint` function connects the components to the I/O of `process_fn` and extracts HARP-readable metadata from the model card and components to include in the endpoint. Currently, HARP supports the [Slider](https://www.gradio.app/docs/gradio/slider) and [Textbox](https://www.gradio.app/docs/gradio/textbox) components as GUI controls.

The following endpoint code corresponds to our [pitch shifter](examples/pitch_shifter/app.py) example:
```python
from pyharp import build_endpoint

import gradio as gr


with gr.Blocks() as demo:
    # Define the Gradio interface
    inputs = [
        gr.Audio(
            label="Audio Input", 
            type="filepath" # make sure type="filepath"!
        ),
        gr.Slider(
            minimum=-24, 
            maximum=24, 
            step=1, 
            value=7, 
            label="Pitch Shift (semitones)"
        ),
    ]
    
    # Initialize an audio component for the output
    output = gr.Audio(label="Audio Output", type="filepath")

    # Build a HARP-compatible endpoint
    widgets = build_endpoint(inputs, output, process_fn, card)

demo.queue()  # see the NOTE below
demo.launch(share=True)
```
**NOTE**: Make sure the order of the inputs matches the order of the arguments in `process_fn`. 

**NOTE**: All of the `gr.Audio` components MUST have `type="filepath"` in order to work with HARP.

**NOTE**: In order to be able to cancel an ongoing processing job within HARP, queueing in Gradio needs to be enabled by calling `demo.queue()`.

## Pre-Trained Models
If you want to build an endpoint that utilizes a pre-trained model, we recommend the following:
- Load the model outside of `process_fn`, so that it is only initialized once
- Store model weights within your app repository using [Git Large File Storage](https://git-lfs.com/)
